---
date: 2025-04-18
title: LLMs
tags: ai
---

This page serves as my place to journal what are hopefully balanced thoughts on the current 
AI summer, driven by LLMs.

# 2025-12-20

Another positive experience I've had with LLMs is finding an opportunity to redo the frontend of a fairly simple web app, 
which was previously a server-side app at work. It's an internal tool, so it's highly suited to this kind of mode of working.
I manually added a few JSON endpoints to the server, and then prompted Claude
to produce a full page, zero dependency, HTML page that used the end-points and served up a vanilla UI. It probably took
under an hour total to reproduce the existing functionality of the app. LLMs are highly effective at generating
HTML and JavaScript and CSS.

I remain uncomfortable shelling out my cognition for load-bearing code, especially on the backend. But I reasoned that
I've made hundreds of web UIs over my career, and there wouldn't be anything new in this one to miss out on. I'm increasingly sure in my determination that one should only genAI things they could do readily themselves for work that they back and own.

Elsewhere, I'm poking at formal methods. If, indeed, the trajectory of software development--in industry--is away from the labor of implementation,
there may perhaps be space for verification. (It does appear that many are switching to statically typed languages, because
it's just as cheap as generating dynamically typed ones, but has an added fast check.) In particular, 
an ideal software system may be generated by genAI, but verified using a composable proof system 
(Liquid Haskell, GoDP, Lean, ...) and reasoned with thought tools (type theory,
category theory, TLA+, others?). That might be a new paradigm, as a lot of software language features and design principles
are derived from avoiding human labour. So I've been poking at Lean, LH and GoDP. I've even revisited design by contracts, 
such as the one in PLT scheme. 

I picture a simple programming language consisting of a graph of prompts accompanied 
by formal properties, CAS addressed like Unison. Something like that would combine three powerful tools: LLM generation,
formal methods and content-addressed code, with the latter making testing and deployment staggeringly faster.

The feeling might pass, but it feels possible that LLMs may make formal methods mainstream. That wouldn't
be so bad, as a good subset of programmers like formal thinking. 

# 2025-12-03

My experience with LLMs since my last update has been both positive and negative. 

On the one hand, I've seen a quality and comprehension drop in some programmers. 
"I vibed it" is becoming a familiar explanation for both. I'm increasingly concerned.

On the other hand, I have found a workflow with LLMs that works for me. For those things that
I could write myself and practically see in my head, this flow makes me happy:

1. Prompt a tool like Cursor or Claude Code with a paragraph description of what to do and where, with the permission to edit files.
2. Close it and return to Emacs.
3. Browse through the diff in magit.
4. Edit almost everything, rewrite some things, leave others that are good.
6. Continue myself by hand as normal.

This has been quite effective for me as a means to speed up tasks which are doing what I've done elsewhere with small differences. 
I'm using it as glorified autocomplete.

# 2025-10-24

I've had what I'd describe as "hole in one" experience where I generated two Haskell packages, sse-conduit and llm-conduit, from a single Claude prompt, which both compiled and worked
the first time when pointing it at llama.cpp's server. This gave me pause as in the past I would enjoyed sitting down
to write these and publishing them. Given that the whole thing took about 10 minutes, I didn't do either.

I call this a funny name like "hole in one" because it's not a normal experience. I had a few weeks prior implemented the same thing
manually with Emacs Lisp, so I wasn't entirely robbed of the experience. I believe I'm arriving at a new standpoint which is
that one may "vibe" projects, but only those things they could do themselves readily. The exercise of writing is often as valuable
as the written thing. 

The more things that you vibe that you do not understand, the more your knowledge will stand still and that muscle will not be exercised, and atrophy.
By contrast, if you only vibe things that you already understand fully, but do the hard work on everything else, you'll continue growing,
but will also get the accelerative edge of LLM vibing.

# 2025-09-23

Harvard published [this article defining "workslop"](https://hbr.org/2025/09/ai-generated-workslop-is-destroying-productivity), a new term for when someone substitutes hard thinking for
LLM generated slop. I had been thinking about this recently, 
having witnessed it at work, but hadn't articulated it yet, 
so I'm glad for the new term.

I accidentally discovered [this article](https://jacobin.com/2024/02/holly-herndon-ai-music-composition) while looking up Holly Herndon,
I enjoyed the reframing of LLMs from "artificial intelligence" to "collective intelligence", which more accurately describes what a large
language model is, and sounds a bit more positive and inclusive.

I got llama.cpp working from Emacs for both regular queries and GBNF-constrained outputs. 
I'm happy with the outputs, though I've not been using it for a couple weeks. Will come back to it.

Current mood: still interested to dabble more. 
Currently sceptical that organisations across the board are benefitting from LLMs. 
I read in the Economist that more small, boutique models, aka SLMs, are becoming preferred over the Big models provided by OpenAI, 
Anthropic, etc. which makes some sense. 

# 2025-08-19

Since the last update, I've experimented with local LLM models on my MacBookPro Max M4, which
can run 3b parameter models. I wanted to approach the whole LLM hype as a tool, like grep or awk,
and see whether there was a niche for it as a way of making free text tractable, rather than
as some kind of sci-fi oracle, as many people seem to treat it. I wrote a module for
Emacs that could stream responses from Ollama.

Those models are very unpredictable as an individual observer. I tried out
Ollama's "tool use", which is when a model will reply with a specific format to call a function
when given a prompt of the right schema. That's also unreliable (to the extent I discount 
its viability for my own purposes), because the mechnism is the same as normal 
prompting and generation.

A tool that might be viable is GBNF, which is a BNF grammar format that llama.cpp supports;
it is a filter function that sits very close to the generation of tokens, and discards
tokens that do not match the GBNF grammar. This is promising because you can at least
rely on the output syntax if not the meaning. It also works well on small models, and
is expensive on larger models. Ollama are not planning to support it, but llama.cpp does,
so I will abandon the former in favor of the latter.

In code generation, I've experimented with fully agentic "make a PR to do x", to a 
50% success rate. Code review bots are hit and miss at the moment. Failure meaning,
it would have been easier and mentally more nourishing to do a task myself
than to deal with the failed interaction.

I've found that cloud LLMs are quite good replacements for Google search, to discover
direct sources. I've in contrast found that exploring ideas like architectures and such
to be unhelpful. It has ironically renewed my interest in theory (TLA+, Liquid Haskell), 
tools that make me think better, rather than delegating my thinking.

I had a month of apathy for working on my open source scripting language, Hell, 
due to a fairly bleak outlook for niche languages due to LLMs. But that passed and
my interest came back.

I'm not an economist, but hopefully no winter or crash is coming.

Overall, present outlook is: tinkering with mild interest, local first,
so-so performance for job-related tasks, using as a Google++, avoiding delegating
thinking, renewed interest in learning theory.

# 2025-06-04

Small update: I'd presently describe my outlook as sceptical. I go in
cycles, of long troughs of scepticism, with very, very, brief
(one-day), widely spread out, spikes of FOMO and belief that AI is an
existential situation for software developers (see previous 2025-04-18
thought dump). But those are becoming more infrequent. I think I see
which way the trend for me is going.

Having cut out the final vestige of social media (RSS feeds; BazQux)
from sheer disinterest, and digital devices in the evening entirely, I
am also serene and a little bored by the whole thing. But it still
does play on the minds of some friends.

I might change my mind on the next update, we'll see.

# 2025-04-18

I've been collecting thoughts on LLMs in a peacemeal way. I add to this document from time to time. It's not an article as such.

* Hype: On forums like HN people have long, familiar, arguments about whether AI is hyped or not.
  This is consistent with any other hyped thing, like crypto or micro services or whatever.
* Objective value: Tools have gotten very good at generating code, which means that some people's work,
  especially those which involve generating throwaway things which are iterated on quickly, has been accelerated,
  and some tasks which were previously inaccessible to people who didn’t have the patience to wait through poorly
  documented APIs is now accessible.
* Not learning: By looking at any topic which is not sufficiently exposed in the training data, one can see that, for example,
  an individual human can learn a given topic and it doesn’t take millions of examples to learn a thing,
  because we can use reasoning --symbolic reasoning/manipulation-- to learn a program language which has just one book, for example.
  Whereas the LLM doesn’t actually learn the programing language, but essentially is learning how to parrot it as if it’s a human language.
  This is why all the popular models are kind of crap at Haskell and cannot speak Lojban at all,
  despite there being a complete and comprehensive book describing Lojban's grammar, semantics, dictionaries and everything like that.
* If it’s not written, it doesn’t exist: Essentially, if someone hasn’t written about it in detail, and posted it online or in a book,
  then it’s basically a piece of human insight which is not accessible to an LLM.
  For example, if nobody ever talked about print debugging online or in books,
  and then you asked an LLM about different ways to debug a program, I'm quite confident the answer would
  not mention any concept of printf debugging because that is a completely human experience which is interactive and comes from experience.
* Objective benefit: LLMs essentially turn human language into code which is digestible, analysable, translatable, summarizeable and generable.
  That means we can apply all of our regular engineering tools like compression and linting and test suites and DSLs. Modulo nondeterminism.
* Objective limitation: As implemented,
  we know that LLMs are capable within their probabilistic transformers to estimate answers to questions, but,
  for example, cannot count the individual letters in a word or do basic arithmetic.
  (At the time of writing; these leaks will be plugged eventually by postprocessing and tools, I'm sure.)
* Speculation on anthropomorphism: I think the reason that LLMs appeared to reason is that the base model,
 which is essentially a snapshot of the Internet, is then of course trained on millions of conversations in
  which a question is posed and an answer is generated,
  which can give the appearance and impression of comprehension and an internal mental model. Clever hans.
* Relating to language theory: I’m reminded of a chapter in Stephen Pinker‘s book The Blank Slate, in which he discusses
  the case of a young woman who has a developmental issue such that she is not able to reason or function independently,
  but is able to speak and tell long, detailed stories, which are completely fabricated,
  but which have an internally consistent grammar and a consistent storyline.
  In this chapter Pinker is pointing out that you can have a grasp of language, but no grasp of logic reasoning et cetera.
* Relation to a consistent pattern of abstraction due to layers of complexity:
 the MIT book Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs was switched from a from-the-ground-up, principles first,
  implementation of various topics, to essentially a goodie bag of scientific ways of using vast APIs and Python.
  And this is completely not a criticism of Abelson or Sussman: in fact, this reflects a deep insight;
  that they had the foresight and integrity to accurately reflect in the education.
  Hardware was too complex; now it’s been abstracted away. The operating system is a
  layer of abstraction, and the programming language is a layer of abstraction.
  And now there is a language which is not only a black box, but it’s also probabilistic... so it’s yet another layer of unpredictability.
* Dijkstra on anthropomorphism:
    * People talking about “asking it..” and “it thinks…” etc. makes me feel icky.
    * Quote from EWD854: I think anthropomorphism is worst of all. I have now seen programs "trying to do things", "wanting to do things", "believing things to be true", "knowing things" etc. Don't be so naive as to believe that this use of language is harmless. It invites the programmer to identify himself with the execution of the program and almost forces upon him the use of operational semantics.
* The Lisp Curse: see [my other article](https://chrisdone.com/posts/the-llm-curse)
* A prior colleague remarked, "Category theory is white magic, AI is black magic." It stuck with me as it succinctly summarises much of the above.
* Humans as machines: Dijkstra and Frank Herbert have this in common: Dijkstra railed against anthropomorphising machines, but he also
  argued against treating humans in mechnistic terms, i.e. [treating them like machines.](https://chrisdone.com/posts/ai-machine-thinking) It's a funny way to flip things around.
